---
layout: post
category: Electronics
tags: [Cosmic Ray Detector]
---
Last summer at the 3rd [Annual High Altitude Conference](http://ahac.stratoballooning.org) Taylor University offered to fund a interuniversity collaborative experiment as part of the Stratospheric Ballooning Association. By the end of the conference it was decided that the first project would be a cosmic ray detection payload for stratospheric balloons. As a representative from Iowa State University, my advisor and I offered to develop the actual detector while Trevecca University worked on a data logger and inertial measurement system (cosmic ray flux varies with location and orientation), University of Minnesota - Morris would consult on the physics and University of North Dakota would work on the overall system integration. Fast forward several months and we have arrived at the current situation. Decisions have been made and parts have been ordered, time to design the electronics.

Several groups have flown cosmic ray detectors on previous balloon missions using coincidence counting geiger detectors. There are several problems with geiger tube based detectors, most notably a small detection area leading to low count rates and therefore high noise, and the requirement for a high voltage bias that can cause problems with arcing at high altitudes. Both problems turned out to be fairly easy to resolve.

Plastic scintillators can be used to convert the incoming cosmic rays into small amounts of light that can be detected. Plastic scintillators can be cut to almost any size and shape, some research grade detectors have lengths greater than 1 meter. The use of scintillators also provides the benefit of being able to measure in energy of the cosmic particles.

The traditional approach to measuring the scintillation flashes is to use a photomultiplier tube, this however brings some of the same problems of using a geiger tube. Photomultiplier require a high voltage, are sensitive to magnetic fields, and can be quite fragile. We decided to therefore use an emerging class of devices called silicon photomultiplier. A SiPM is essentially many avalanche photodiodes arranged on a single die and operated in parallel. Because each APD element is operating in geiger mode, a single element cannot provide energy information, but the many devices operating together effectively act as a propotional detector.

From these decisions, a rough overview of the final system begins to take shape. Two plastic scintillator panels must be held parallel to each other (two panels are used to provide coincidence detection). The light from the scintillators is coupled into a fiber optic cable and transferred to the detector module (SiPM, bias supply, amplifier, signal conditioning). The detector module sends the measured data to the data logger to be combined with GPS location, IMU orientation, and local magnetic field measurements. Each system will be discussed in detail in upcoming posts and a paper to be presented at the 2013 Academic High Altitude Conference.